AWS Public Sector Blog
Students across Arizona participate in a statewide robotics hackathon
by Audrey Bierly | on 21 NOV 2019 | in AWS Educate, AWS RoboMaker, Education, Higher Education, 
Public Sector, Robotics | Permalink |  Comments |  Share
Photo courtesy Grace Lieberman, The State Press
Photo courtesy Grace Lieberman, The State Press

In collaboration with Amazon Web Services (AWS) and NVIDIA, Arizona State University (ASU) 
hosted its first-ever robotics hackathon. At the Arizona Robo Hackathon, 64 undergraduate and 
graduate students across seven institutions came together to compete in an Arizona statewide 
competition hosted on AWS.

Inside the Hackathon
Students formed 15 teams and spent the weekend competing in four missions:

Assemble a SparkFun JetBot AI Kit powered by NVIDIA Jetson Nano
Bring the NVIDIA JetBot to life and make it spin on its own
Have the NVIDIA JetBot autonomously navigate a LEGO track
Design, develop, and deploy new capabilities to the NVIDIA JetBot using the AWS Cloud
By the end of the hackathon, students successfully applied their knowledge of computer science, 
engineering, and programming skills in robotics and artificial intelligence (AI) application 
development. The first-place team, Light Speed, showcased an NVIDIA JetBot that navigated a 
LEGO track in under 10 seconds and could recognize and locate a picture of Jeff Bezos. 
Their solution used technologies like Amazon Simple Storage Service (Amazon S3), an 
Amazon SageMaker Jupyter notebook powered by Amazon Elastic Compute Cloud (Amazon EC2), 
Amazon Simple Notification Service (Amazon SNS), and AWS RoboMaker. Light Speed team members 
Christopher Harsh, Riley Tallman, Shabab Siddique, Tyriq Hayes, and Xina Tang won a $5,000 
prize. The second-place team received a prize of $2,500 and the third-place team received a 
prize of $1,000.

“It’s amazing to see what students accomplished in a single weekend,” said John Rome, 
Deputy CIO at Arizona State University. “In addition to robot assembly, students leveraged 
the AWS Cloud to give their robots new capabilities, like identifying objects, spelling words, 
and even singing classic rock songs. It was great that the AWS team and NVIDIA team supported 
students throughout the weekend – including nights with no sleep – providing expertise through 
technical training sessions, encouragement, and mentorship.”

AWS and NVIDIA sponsored the event, donating the time of several solutions architects, 
engineers, and program managers. These stakeholders led pre-hackathon training sessions 
on AWS Cloud basics, Python, Amazon SageMaker, Robot Operating System (ROS), AWS RoboMaker, 
and NVIDIA JetBot assembly. Students also signed up for AWS Educate, Amazon’s global 
initiative that provides students and educators with the resources needed to accelerate 
cloud-related learning.

“We worked hard throughout the hackathon, but it was worth it. We enjoyed applying 
machine learning on AWS to the NVIDIA JetBot and it was rewarding to show it off 
moving intelligently in real space,” said Christopher Harsh, a student at ASU and 
member of Light Speed.

Interested in hosting a robotics hackathon at your institution? 
Contact aws-robomaker-academics@amazon.com.
https://aws.amazon.com/blogs/publicsector/students-across-arizona-participate-in-a-statewide-robotics-hackathon/

Arizona State University students took on challenges in robotics, machine learning and 
artificial intelligence alongside their peers from universities and community colleges 
across the state at the first-ever Robo Hackathon on ASU’s Tempe campus.
Undergraduate students in engineering, computer science and related majors were challenged 
with developing an autonomous robotic system that could race through a track and recognize 
their school’s mascot. Undergraduate students from all over Arizona applied their skills 
in robotics, machine learning and artificial intelligence at the first Robo Hackathon 
hosted by ASU. The Ira A. Fulton Schools of Engineering, ASU University Technology Office 
and sponsors NVIDIA and Amazon Web Services challenged students to build robots that could 
recognize their school’s mascot using open-source SparkFun JetBot AI Kits powered by 
NVIDIA’s Jetson Nano Developer Kit and Amazon Web Services tools such as AWS RoboMaker 
and SageMaker. Photo by Erika Gronek/ASUDownload Full Image
Each team, which included three to five undergraduate students and a maximum of one 
graduate student, included members representing multiple disciplines, just as the field 
of artificial intelligence requires in industry and research teams. They competed for more 
than $8,000 in prizes — and bragging rights as the first Robo Hackathon winner. 
Robotics, machine learning and artificial intelligence are growing in importance as Arizona’s 
industry and academic institutions position the region as a smart technology hub. The ASU 
University Technology Office hosts hackathons each fall and spring to empower students to 
apply their skills and learn new ones to solve real-world problems. ASU UTO saw a statewide 
robotics hackathon as a great opportunity.
"The Robo Hackathon — and all ASU hackathons we lead — are a way to actively engage students, 
our next generation of leaders and changemakers, with opportunities to learn and apply the 
kinds of skills that are vital for the growth of Arizona and beyond,” said John Rome, deputy 
chief information officer for ASU UTO and lead organizer of the Robo Hackathon. “The students 
who participated are truly a snapshot of the future and it gives us great pride and hope. 
It was an honor to provide them an opportunity to experiment with the latest cloud solutions."
To put on Arizona's first Robo Hackathon, UTO leveraged strategic partnerships with the Ira A. 
Fulton Schools of Engineering at ASU and the university’s work in the Smart City Cloud Innovation 
Center, which includes partners such as Amazon Web Services, to organize an event that engages
the next generation of changemakers to use their skills to impact Arizona’s technology future.
Sponsors NVIDIA and AWS provided the participants access to some of the latest robotics and AI 
programming technology. Students used the open-source SparkFun JetBot AI Kit powered by NVIDIA’s 
Jetson Nano Developer Kit as a launchpad to create their AI projects, paired with AWS tools such 
as AWS RoboMaker and SageMaker.
Yinong Chen, a principal lecturer of computer science and engineering in the Fulton Schools, 
helped design the competition missions that helped students progressively increase their 
robots’ capabilities to become mascot-identifying racing bots. He says this was a great 
opportunity for students to apply their classroom knowledge.
“The Robo Hackathon helped Arizona students combine the knowledge they learned in university 
classes with the cutting-edge technologies and platforms provided by AWS, Nvidia and SparkFun, 
including robotics, internet of things and machine learning skills,” Chen said.
Over three days, the students learned how to use AWS tools, assembled their SparkFun JetBot 
kits and machine learning concepts to detect and navigate a path and to classify images. 
Their missions included basic movements, autonomous navigation around obstacles and recognizing 
mascots. The participating teams were scored on their speed and completion of the missions.
The students also had to think quickly on their feet when an unexpected speed bump caused 
the image reading capabilities of the camera to not work as planned. 
“Finding existing problems in the system is a part of a hackathon event, and the students 
did it,” Chen said. “The organizers had to slightly modify the missions to get around the problem, 
which allowed the students to create a new solution based on the new requirements.”
He says he was impressed by the students’ ability to dynamically adjust to the new challenge 
by utilizing their understanding of fundamental principles of machine learning and their 
programming skills. 
Chen’s favorite mission was a speed race in which students’ robots had to capture and 
recognize the track images using machine learning.
“The robot must perform all the difficult tasks in racing conditions,” Chen said. 
“It is very hard to achieve what the students achieved (in the short time frame of) the 
hackathon.”
Overall, Chen thought it was an excellent event and a valuable experience for all the 
students involved.
“The event was well organized and students learned a lot from the hackathon, whether or 
not they won the cash prizes,” he said.
Team Light Speed from ASU took home first place and $5,000, Team Robin Noodles from ASU 
was awarded second place and $2,500, and Team CATS from the University of Arizona earned 
third place and $1,000.
UTO will continue to host hackathons at ASU that apply hands-on skills in high demand in 
the region. With the popularity of the first Robo Hackathon, UTO will likely hold more 
opportunities to apply robotics, machine learning and artificial intelligence skills 
in future events.
https://aws.amazon.com/blogs/publicsector/students-across-arizona-participate-in-a-statewide-robotics-hackathon/
https://news.asu.edu/20191118-arizona-robo-hackathon-puts-students-technical-skills-test
